---
layout: post
title:  "What I Learned from Open Source Bridge 2017"
categories: blog
tags: conference
published: false
---

I spent last week at [Open Source Bridge](http://opensourcebridge.org/), a conference about open source technology and citizenship.
I worried that because I haven't been involved in any major open source projects I would feel lost, but instead I learned a lot about the community.
Most of the people who attend OSB are also interested in improving the culture of tech.

Open Source Bridge felt like two connected parts.
The first is actual (open-source) technology.
I didn't go to very many technical sessions because I'm not very interested in details right now.
I'm still in the "learning how to learn" phase where details don't matter too much.

The other part of the conference centered around culture.
Tech is not a bubble, and I've been hyperaware of the ways that tech can be toxic since I was the first "girl" on my robotics team.
Now that I've transitioned, I'm working on reconciling my place as a white (cis-passing) man.
The people at Open Source Bridge have also been thinking about these things, and have ideas on what to do about it.

The four-day conference was somewhat of a whirlwind, and left me with a lot of information to process.
The things that really stuck with me fall into three parts:
Cool open source projects,
Building an maintaining Open Source Projects,
and Creating an inclusive tech culture.

# Cool Open Source Projects
Being a student new to contributing to huge projects, I was fairly excited for "How can I contribute?" on the second day.

- How can I contribute? (D2.3) -- Lists of places to get started
- Keeping Secrets on Remote Machines (D1.3) -- EFF & OS Crypto
- Alternative Communication Infrastructure (D3.4) -- Mesh Networks

# Project Management
- Launch Your Open Source Project (D2.1)
- Build Management for your Personal Project (D3.5)
- Democratizing Data (D1.5)
  - Fake Science! Sad! (D3 Keynote)

# Culture, Inclusivity, and Technology
- Tech Reform (D1 Keynote)
- Bad Shibboleths (D2 Keynote)
- Reshape the Cultural Memory of Tech (D2.5)
- How Math Restricts Us (D3.1)

# Lessons Learned
